# Conclusions {#concl}

At this stage we don't think it approriate to claim that any strong conclusion can be reached based on the above.  We do however, claim that the is a topic that could be worth discussion and more work.

To start with, Internet technology developers need to be better aware of the issues beyond communications security, and consider them in design. At the IETF it would be beneficial to include some of these considerations in the usual systematic security analysis of technologies under development.

In particular, when the IETF develops infrastructure technology for the Internet (such as routing or naming systems), considering the impacts of data generated by those technologies is important. Minimising data collection from users, minimising the parties who get exposed to user data, and protecting data that is relayed or stored in systems should be a priority.

A key focus area at the IETF has been the security of transport protocols, and how transport layer security can be best used to provide the right security for various applications. However, more work is needed in equivalently broadly deployed tools for minimising or obfuscating information provided by users to other entities, and the use of end-to-end security through entities that are involved in the protocol exchange but who do not need to know everything that is being passed through them.

Comments on the issues discussed in this memo are gladly taken either privately or on the model-t mailing list (https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/Model-t).

Some further work includes items listed in {{guidelinessect}} and {{studysect}}, as well as compiling categories of vulnerabilities that need to be addressed, examples of specific attacks, and continuing the analysis of the situation and possible new remedies.

It is also necessary find suitable use cases that the IETF can address by further work in this space. A completely adversial situation is not really workable, but  there are situations where some parties are trustworthy, and wish to co-operate to show to each other that this is really the case. In these situations data minimisation can be beneficial to both, attestation can provide additional trust, detection of incidents can alert the parties to action, and so on.

